Syllabus for JEE Main Paper 1 (B.E./B.Tech.)- Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry
MATHEMATICS UNIT 1: SETS, RELATIONS AND FUNCTIONS:
Sets and their representation; Union, intersection and complement of sets and
their algebraic properties; Power set; Relations, type of relations, equivalence
relations, functions; one-one, into and onto functions, the composition of
functions.
UNIT 2: COMPLEX NUMBERS AND QUADRATIC EQUATIONS:
Complex numbers as ordered pairs of reals, Representation of complex numbers
in the form a + ibandtheirrepresentationinaplane,Arganddiagram,algebraof
complex numbers, modulus and argument (or amplitude) of a complex number,
Quadratic equations in real and complex number systems and their solutions;
Relations between roots and coefficients, nature of roots, the formation of
quadraticequationswithgivenroots.
UNIT3: MATRICES AND DETERMINANTS:
Matrices, algebra of matrices, type of matrices, determinants and matrices of
order two and three, evaluation of determinants, area of triangles using
determinants; Adjoint and inverse of a square matrix; Test of consistency and
solutionofsimultaneouslinearequationsintwoorthreevariablesusingmatrices.
UNIT 4: PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS:
Thefundamentalprincipleofcounting,permutationsandcombinations;Meaning
of P(n, r)and C(n, r).Simpleapplications.
UNIT 5: BINOMIAL THEOREM AND ITS SIMPLE APPLICATIONS:
Binomialtheoremforapositiveintegralindex,generaltermandmiddletermand
simpleapplications.
UNIT 6: SEQUENCE AND SERIES:
ArithmeticandGeometricprogressions,insertionofarithmetic,geometric means
betweentwogivennumbers,RelationbetweenA.MandG.M.
UNIT 7: LIMIT, CONTINUITY AND DIFFERENTIABILITY:
Real–valued functions, algebra of functions; polynomial, rational, trigonometric,
logarithmic and exponential functions; inverse functions. Graphs of simple
functions. Limits, continuity and differentiability. Differentiation of the sum,
difference, product and quotient of two functions. Differentiation of
trigonometric, inverse trigonometric, logarithmic, exponential, composite and
implicit functions; derivatives of order upto two, Applications of derivatives:
Rate of change of quantities, monotonic-Increasing and decreasing functions,
Maximaandminimaoffunctionsofonevariable.
UNIT 8: INTEGRAL CALCULAS:
Integral as an anti-derivative, Fundamental integrals involving algebraic,
trigonometric,exponential and logarithmicfunctions. Integration bysubstitution,
by parts and by partial fractions. Integration using trigonometric identities.
Evaluationofsimpleintegralsofthetype
Syllabus for JEE (Main) - 2026
The fundamental theorem of calculus, properties of definite integrals.
Evaluation of definite integrals, determining areas of the regions bounded by
simplecurves bysimplecurvesinstandardforms.
UNIT 9: DIFFRENTIAL EQUATIONS :
Ordinarydifferentialequations,theirorderanddegree,thesolutionofdifferential
equationbythemethodofseparationofvariables,solutionofahomogeneous
andlineardifferentialequationofthetype
??
?? + ? ? ? = ?(?).
UNIT 10: CO-ORDINATE GEOMETRY :
Cartesiansystemofrectangularcoordinatesinaplane,distanceformula,sections
formula, locus and its equation, the slope of a line, parallel and perpendicular
lines,interceptsofalineontheco-ordinateaxis.
Straight line: Various forms of equations of a line, intersection of lines, angles
between two lines, conditions for concurrence of three lines, the distance of a
pointform a line,co-ordinate of the centroid, orthocentre and circumcentre of a
triangle.
Circle, conic sections: A standard form of equations of a circle, the general
form ofthe equation of a circle, itsradius and centre, equation of a circle when
theendpointsofadiameteraregiven,pointsofintersectionofalineandacircle
with the centre at the origin and sections of conics, equations of conic sections
(parabola,ellipseandhyperbola)instandardforms.
UNIT 11: THREE DIMENSIONAL GEOMETRY :
Coordinates of a point in space, the distance between two points, section
formula, direction ratios and direction cosines and the angle between two
intersecting lines. Equation of a line; Skew lines, the shortest distance between
themanditsequation.
UNIT 12: VECTOR ALGEBRA :
Vectors and scalars, the addition of vectors, components of a vector in two
dimensionsandthree-dimensionalspaces,scalarandvectorproducts.
UNIT 13: STATISTICS AND PROBABILITY :
Measures of dispersion; calculation of mean, median, mode of grouped and
ungrouped data, calculation of standard deviation, variance and mean
deviationforgroupedandungroupeddata.Probability:Probabilityofanevent,
additionandmultiplicationtheoremsofprobability,Baye'stheorem,probability
distributionofarandomvariable.
UNIT 14: TRIGONOMETRY :
Trigonometrical identities and trigonometrical functions, inverse trigonometrical
functionstheirproperties.
PHYSICS
UNIT 1: Units and Measurements
Unitsofmeasurements,Systemofunits,SIUnits,fundamentalandderivedunits,
leastcount, significant figures,Errors inmeasurements. Dimensionsof Physics
quantities,dimensionalanalysisanditsapplications.
UNIT 2: Kinematics
The frame of reference, motion in a straight line, speed and velocity, uniform
and non-uniform motion, average speed and instantaneous velocity, uniformly
accelerated motion, velocity-time, position-time graph, relations for uniformly
acceleratedmotion,relativevelocity.
Motioninaplane,projectilemotion,uniformcircularmotion.
UNIT 3: Laws of Motion
Force and inertia, Newton’s first law of motion, momentum, Newton’s second
Lawofmotion,impulse,Newton’sthirdLawofmotion.Lawofconservationof
linearmomentumanditsapplications,equilibriumofconcurrentforces.
StaticandKineticfriction,lawsoffriction,rollingfriction.
Dynamics of uniform circular motion, centripetal force and its applications:
vehicleonalevelcircularroad,vehicleonabankedroad.
UNIT 4: Work, Energy and Power
Workdonebyaconstantforceandavariableforce,kineticandpotentialenergies,
work-energytheorem,power.
The potential energy of a spring, conservation of mechanical energy,
conservative and non- conservative forces, motion in a vertical circle. Elastic
andinelasticcollisionsinoneandtwodimensions.
UNIT 5: Rotational Motion
Centre of mass of a two-particle system, centre of mass of a rigid body. Basic
concepts of rotational motion, moment of a force, torque, angular momentum,
conservationofangularmomentumanditsapplications.
The moment of inertia, the radius of gyration, values of moments of inertia for
simple geometrical objects, parallel and perpendicular axes theorems and their
applications. Equilibrium of rigid bodies, rigid body rotation and equations of
rotationalmotion,comparisonoflinearandrotationalmotions.
UNIT 6: Gravitation
The universal law of gravitation. Acceleration due to gravity and its variation
withaltitudeanddepth.Kepler’slawofplanetarymotion.Gravitationalpotential
energy, gravitational potential. Escape velocity, motion of a satellite, orbital
velocity,timeperiodandenergyofsatellite.
UNIT 7: Properties of Solids and Liquids
Elastic behaviour, stress-strain relationship, Hooke's Law, Young's modulus,
bulkmodulusandmodulusofrigidity.
Syllabus for JEE (Main) - 2026
Pressureduetoafluidcolumn,Pascal'slawanditsapplications,effectofgravity
on fluid pressure, viscosity, Stoke’s law, terminal velocity, streamline and
turbulentflow,criticalvelocity,Bernoulli'sprincipleanditsapplications.
Surfaceenergyandsurfacetension,angleofcontact,excessofpressureacrossa
curvedsurface,applicationofsurfacetension:drops,bubblesandcapillaryrise.
Heat, temperature, thermal expansion, specific heat capacity, calorimetry,
changeofstate,latentheat.Heattransfer:conduction,convectionandradiation.
UNIT 8: Thermodynamics
Thermal equilibrium and the concept of temperature, zeroth law of
thermodynamics, heat, work and internal energy. The first law of
thermodynamics, isothermal and adiabatic processes. The second law of
thermodynamics:reversibleandirreversibleprocesses.
UNIT 9: Kinetic Theory of Gases
Equation of state of a perfect gas, work done on compressing a gas, kinetic
theory of gases: assumptions,the concept of pressure, kinetic interpretation of
temperature, RMS speed of gas molecules, degrees of freedom, law of
equipartition of energy and applications to specific heat capacities of gases,
meanfreepath,Avogadro'snumber.
UNIT 10: Oscillations and Waves
Oscillations and periodic motion: time period, frequency, displacement as a
function of time, periodic functions. Simple harmonic motion (S.H.M.) and its
equation, phase, oscillations of a spring: restoring force and force constant,
energy in S.H.M.: kinetic and potential energies, simple pendulum: derivation
ofexpressionforitstimeperiod.
Wave motion, longitudinal and transverse waves, speed of the travelling wave,
displacement relation for a progressive wave, principle of superposition of
waves, reflection of waves, standing waves in strings and organ pipes,
fundamentalmodeandharmonics,beats.
UNIT 11: Electrostatics
Electric charges: conservation of charge, Coulomb's law forces between two
point charges, forces between multiple charges, superposition principle and
continuouschargedistribution.
Electric field: electric field due to a point charge, electric field lines, electric
dipole, electric field due to a dipole, torque on a dipole in a uniform electric
field.
Electricflux,Gauss'slawanditsapplicationstofindfieldduetoinfinitelylong
uniformly charged straight wire, uniformly charged infinite plane sheet and
uniformlychargedthinsphericalshell.
Electric potential and its calculation for a point charge, electric dipole and
system of charges, potential difference, equipotential surfaces, electrical
potential energy of a system of two point charges and of electric dipole in an
electrostaticfield.
Conductors and insulators, dielectrics and electric polarization, capacitors and
capacitance, thecombinationofcapacitorsinseriesandparallelandcapacitance
of a parallel plate capacitor with and without dielectric medium between the
plates,energystoredinacapacitor.
UNIT 12: Current Electricity
Electric current: drift velocity, mobility and their relation with electric current,
Ohm's law, electrical resistance, I-V characteristics of Ohmic and non-ohmic
conductors,electrical energy and power, electrical resistivity and conductivity,
series and parallel combinations of resistors, temperature dependence of
resistance.
Internalresistance,potentialdifferenceandemfofacell,acombinationofcells
inseriesandparallel.
Kirchhoff’slawsandtheirapplications,Wheatstonebridge,MetreBridge.
UNIT 13: Magnetic Effects of Current and Magnetism
Biot - Savart law and its application to the current carrying circular loop,
Ampere's law and its applications to infinitely long current carrying straight
wireandsolenoid.
Force on a moving charge in uniform magnetic and electric fields, force on a
current-carrying conductor in a uniform magnetic field, the force between two
parallel currents carrying conductors-definition of ampere, torque experienced
by a current loop in a uniform magnetic field: Moving coil galvanometer, its
sensitivityandconversiontoammeterandvoltmeter.
Currentloopasamagneticdipoleanditsmagneticdipolemoment,barmagnetas
anequivalent solenoid, magnetic field lines, magnetic field due to a magnetic
dipole (bar magnet) along its axis and perpendicular to its axis, torque on a
magnetic dipole in a uniform magnetic field, para-, dia- and ferromagnetic
substanceswithexamples,theeffectoftemperatureonmagneticproperties.
UNIT 14: Electromagnetic Induction and Alternating Currents
Electromagneticinduction:Faraday'slaw,inducedemfandcurrent,Lenz’slaw,
eddycurrents,selfandmutualinductance.
Alternating currents, peak and RMS value of alternating current/voltage,
reactance and impedance, LCR series circuit, resonance, power in AC circuits,
wattlesscurrent,ACgeneratorandtransformer.
UNIT 15: Electromagnetic Waves
Displacement current, electromagnetic waves and their characteristics,
transverse nature of electromagnetic waves, electromagnetic spectrum (radio
waves, microwaves, infrared, visible, ultraviolet, X-rays, Gamma rays),
applicationsofelectromagneticwaves.
UNIT 16: Optics
Reflection of light, spherical mirrors, mirror formula. Refraction of light at
plane and spherical surfaces, thin lens formula and lens maker formula, total
internal reflection and its applications, magnification, power of a lens,
combination of thin lenses in contact, refraction of light through a prism,
microscope and astronomical telescope (reflecting and refracting ) and their
magnifyingpowers.
Wave optics: wavefront and Huygens ‘Principle, laws of reflection and
refraction using Huygens principle. Interference: Young's double-slit
experiment and expression for fringe width, coherent sources and sustained
interferenceoflight.Diffractionduetoasingleslit,widthofcentralmaximum.
Polarization: plane-polarized light, Brewster's law, uses of plane- polarized
lightandPolaroid.
UNIT 17: Dual Nature of Matter and Radiation
Dual nature of radiation, Photoelectric effect, Hertz and Lenard's observations,
Einstein's photoelectric equation, particle nature of light. Matter waves: wave
natureofparticle,de-Broglierelation.
UNIT 18: Atoms and Nuclei
Alpha-particlescattering experiment, Rutherford's model of atom, Bohr model,
energy levels, hydrogen spectrum. Composition and size of nucleus, atomic
masses, mass-energy relation, mass defect, binding energy per nucleon and its
variationwithmassnumber,nuclearfissionandfusion.
UNIT 19: Electronic Devices
Semiconductors, semiconductor diode: I-V characteristics in forward and
reverse bias, diode as a rectifier; I-V characteristics of LED, the photodiode,
solarcell,Zenerdiode,Zenerdiodeasavoltageregulator.
Logicgates(OR.AND.NOT.NANDandNOR).
UNIT 20: Experimental Skills
Familiarity with the basic approach and observations of the experiments and
activities:
1. Vernier calipers -its use to measure the internal and external diameter and
depthofavessel.
2. Screwgauge-itsusetodeterminethethickness/diameterofthinsheet/wire.
3. Simple pendulum-dissipation of energy by plotting a graph between the
squareofamplitudeandtime.
4. Metrescale-themassofagivenobjectbytheprincipleofmoments.
5. Young'smodulusofelasticityofthematerialofametallicwire.
6. Surfacetensionofwaterbycapillaryriseandeffectofdetergents,
7. Co-efficient of viscosity of a given viscous liquid by measuring the
terminalvelocityofagivensphericalbody.
8. Speedofsoundinairatroomtemperatureusingaresonancetube,
9. Specific heat capacity of a given (i) solid and (ii) liquid by method of
mixtures.
10. Theresistivityofthematerialofagivenwireusingametrebridge.
11. TheresistanceofagivenwireusingOhm'slaw.
12. Resistanceandfigureofmeritofagalvanometerbyhalfdeflectionmethod.
13. Thefocallengthof
(i) Convexmirror
(ii) Concavemirrorand
(iii)Convexlens,usingtheparallaxmethod.
14. The plot of the angle of deviation vs angle of incidence for a triangular
prism.
15. Therefractiveindexofaglassslabusingatravellingmicroscope.
16. Characteristiccurvesofap-njunctiondiodeinforwardandreversebias.
17. Characteristic curves of a Zener diode and finding reverse breakdown
voltage.
18. Identification of diode, LED, resistor, a capacitor from a mixed collection
ofsuchitems
CHEMISTRY
PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY
UNIT I: SOME BASIC CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
Matteranditsnature,Dalton'satomictheory,Conceptofatom,molecule,elementandcompound,Lawsof
chemicalcombination,Atomicandmolecularmasses,moleconcept, molarmass,percentagecomposition,
empiricalandmolecularformulae,Chemicalequationsandstoichiometry.
UNIT 2: ATOMIC STRUCTURE
Natureofelectromagneticradiation,photoelectric effect,spectrumofthehydrogenatom, Bohrmodelofa
hydrogen atom - its postulates, derivation of the relations for the energy of the electron and radii of the
different orbits, limitations of Bohr's model, dual nature of matter, de Broglie's relationship, Heisenberg
uncertaintyprinciple,elementaryideasofquantummechanics,thequantummechanicalmodeloftheatom
anditsimportantfeatures,conceptofatomicorbitalsasone-electronwave functions,variationof ?and ?
2 with r for 1s and 2s orbitals, various quantum numbers (principal, angular momentum and magnetic
quantumnumbers)andtheirsignificance, shapesof s, p and d - orbitals, electron spin andspin quantum
number, rules for filling electrons in orbitals – Aufbau principle, Pauli's exclusion principle and Hund's
rule,electronicconfigurationofelementsandextrastabilityofhalf-filledandcompletelyfilledorbitals.
UNIT 3: CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
Kossel-Lewisapproach to chemical bond formation, the concept of ionic andcovalent bonds.
Ionic Bonding: Formation of ionic bonds, factors affecting the formation of ionic bonds; calculation of
latticeenthalpy.
CovalentBonding:Conceptofelectronegativity,Fajan’srule,dipolemoment,ValenceShellElectronPair
Repulsion(VSEPR)theoryandshapesofsimplemolecules.
Quantum mechanical approach to covalent bonding: Valence bond theory - its important features, the
conceptofhybridizationinvolvings,panddorbitals,resonance.
Molecular Orbital Theory - Its important features, LCAOs, types of molecular orbitals (bonding,
antibonding), sigma and pi-bonds, molecular orbital electronic configurations of homonuclear diatomic
molecules,theconceptofbondorder,bondlengthandbondenergy.
Elementary idea of metallicbonding, hydrogen bonding and its applications.
UNIT 4: CHEMICAL THERMODYNAMICS
Fundamentals of thermodynamics: System and surroundings, extensive and intensive properties, state
functions,entropy,typesofprocesses.
The first law of thermodynamics - Concept of work, heat, internal energy and enthalpy, heat capacity,
molar heat capacity, Hess’s law of constant heat summation, Enthalpies of bond dissociation,
combustion,formation,atomization,sublimation,phasetransition,hydration,ionizationandsolution.
The second law of thermodynamics - Spontaneity of processes, ΔS of the universe and ΔG of the
systemascriteriaforspontaneity. ΔG°(StandardGibbsenergychange)andequilibriumconstant.
UNIT 5: SOLUTIONS
Different methods for expressing the concentration of solution - molality, molarity, mole fraction,
percentage(byvolumeandmassboth),thevapourpressureofsolutionsandRaoult'sLaw-Idealandnon-
ideal solutions, vapour pressure - composition, plots for ideal and non- ideal solutions, Colligative
properties of dilute solutions - a relative lowering of vapour pressure, depression of freezing point, the
elevation of boiling point and osmotic pressure, determination of molecular mass using colligative
properties,abnormalvalueofmolarmass,van’tHofffactoranditssignificance.
UNIT 6: EQUILIBRIUM
Meaning of equilibriumis the conceptof dynamicequilibrium.
Equilibria involving physical processes: Solid-liquid, liquid-gas, gas-gas and solid-gas equilibria,
Henry'slaw.Generalcharacteristicsofequilibriuminvolvingphysicalprocesses.
Equilibrium involving chemical processes:Lawofchemicalequilibrium,equilibriumconstants(Kp and
Kc) and their significance, the significance of ΔG and ΔG ° in chemical equilibrium, factors affecting
equilibriumconcentration,pressure,temperature,theeffectofcatalyst,LeChatelier’sprinciple.
Ionic equilibrium:Weakandstrongelectrolytes,ionizationof electrolytes,variousconcepts ofacidsand
bases (Arrhenius, Bronsted - Lowry and Lewis) and their ionization, acid-base equilibria (including
multistage ionization) and ionization constants, ionization of water, pH scale, common ion effect,
hydrolysis of salts and pH of their solutions, the solubility of sparingly soluble salts, solubility products
andbuffersolutions.
UNIT 7: REDOX REACTIONS AND ELECTROCHEMISTRY
Electronic concepts of oxidation and reduction, redox reactions, oxidation number, rules for assigning
oxidationnumberandbalancingofredoxreactions.
Electrolytic andmetallicconduction, conductancein electrolyticsolutions,molar conductivitiesandtheir
variationwithconcentration,Kohlrausch’slawanditsapplications.
Electrochemical cells - Electrolytic and Galvanic cells, different types of electrodes, electrode potentials
including standard electrode potential, half-cell and cell reactions, emf of a Galvanic cell and its
measurement, Nernst equation and its applications, relationship between cell potential and Gibbs' energy
change,drycellandleadaccumulator,fuelcells.
UNIT 8: CHEMICAL KINETICS
Rate of a chemical reaction, factors affecting the rate of reactions: concentration, temperature, pressure
and catalyst, elementary and complex reactions, order and molecularity of reactions, rate law, rate
constant and its units, differential and integral forms of zero and first-order reactions, their
characteristics and half-lives, the effect of temperature on the rate of reactions, Arrhenius theory,
activationenergyanditscalculation,collisiontheoryofbi-moleculargaseousreactions(noderivation).
INORGANIC CHEMISTRY
UNIT 9: CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
Modernperiodiclawandpresentformoftheperiodictable,s,p.dandfblockelements,periodictrendsin
properties of elements atomic and ionic radii, ionization enthalpy, electron gain enthalpy, valence,
oxidationstatesandchemicalreactivity.
UNIT 10: p- BLOCK ELEMENTS
Group -13 to Group 18 Elements
General Introduction:Electronicconfigurationandgeneraltrendsinphysicalandchemicalproperties of
elementsacrosstheperiodsanddownthegroups,uniquebehaviourofthefirstelementineachgroup.
UNIT 11: d - and f- BLOCK ELEMENTS
Transition Elements - General introduction, electronic configuration, occurrence and characteristics,
general trends in properties of the first-row transition elements - physical properties, ionization enthalpy,
oxidation states, atomic radii, colour, catalytic behaviour, magnetic properties, complex formation,
interstitialcompounds,alloyformation,preparation,propertiesandusesof K2Cr2O7andKMnO4.
Inner Transition Elements
Lanthanoids - Electronic configuration, oxidation states and Lanthanoid contraction.
Actinoids - Electronic configuration and oxidation states.
UNIT 12: COORDINATION COMPOUNDS
Introduction to coordination compounds. Werner's theory, ligands, coordination number, denticity,
chelation, IUPAC nomenclature of mononuclear co-ordination compounds, isomerism, Bonding: Valence
bond approach and basic ideas of Crystal field theory, colour and magnetic properties, importance of
coordinationcompounds(inqualitativeanalysis, extractionofmetalsandinbiologicalsystems).
ORGANIC CHEMISTRY
UNIT 13: PURIFICATION AND CHARACTERISATION OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Purification - Crystallization, sublimation, distillation, differential extraction and chromatography -
principlesandtheirapplications.
Qualitative analysis - Detection of nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus and halogens.
Quantitative analysis (basic principles only) - Estimation of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, halogens,
sulphurandphosphorus.
Calculations of empirical formulae and molecular formulae, numerical problems in organic quantitative
analysis,
UNIT 14: SOME BASIC PRINCIPLES OF ORGANIC CHEMISTRY
Tetravalency of carbon, shapes of simple molecules - hybridization (s and p): classification of organic
compounds based on functional groups and those containing halogens, oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur,
homologousseries:Isomerism-structuralandstereoisomerism.
Nomenclature (Trivial and IUPAC)
Covalent bond fission - Homolytic and heterolytic, free radicals, carbocations and carbanions, stability of
carbocationsandfreeradicals,electrophilesandnucleophiles.
Electronic displacement in a covalent bond
- Inductive effect, electromericeffect, resonance and hyperconjugation.
Common types of organic reactions- Substitution, addition, elimination and rearrangement.
UNITS 15: HYDROCARBONS
Classification,isomerism,IUPACnomenclature,generalmethodsofpreparation,propertiesandreactions.
Alkanes - Conformations: Sawhorse and Newman projections (of ethane), mechanism of halogenation of
alkanes.
Alkenes - Geometrical isomerism, mechanism of electrophilic addition, addition of hydrogen, halogens,
water,hydrogenhalides(Markownikoffsandperoxideeffect),Ozonolysisandpolymerization.
Alkynes-Acidiccharacter,additionofhydrogen,halogens,waterandhydrogenhalides,polymerization.
Aromatic hydrocarbons-Nomenclature,benzene-structureandaromaticity,mechanismofelectrophilic
substitution,halogenation,nitration.
Friedel-Craft's alkylation and acylation, directive influence of the functional group in mono- substituted
benzene.
UNIT 16: ORGANIC COMPOUNDS CONTAINING HALOGENS
General methods of preparation, properties and reactions, nature of C-X bond, mechanisms of
substitutionreactions.
Uses,environmental effectsof chloroform, iodoform, freons and DDT.
UNIT 17: ORGANIC COMPOUNDS CONTAINING OXYGEN
General methods of preparation, properties, reactions and uses.
ALCOHOLS, PHENOLS AND ETHERS
Alcohols:Identificationofprimary,secondaryandtertiaryalcohols,mechanismofdehydration.
Phenols: Acidic nature, electrophilic substitution reactions, halogenation, nitration and sulphonation,
Reimer-Tiemannreaction.
Ethers: Structure.
Aldehyde and Ketones: Nature of carbonyl group, nucleophilic addition to >C=O group, relative
reactivities of aldehydes and ketones, important reactions such as - Nucleophilic addition reactions
(addition of HCN, NH3 and its derivatives), Grignard reagent, oxidation, reduction (Wolf Kishner and
Clemmensen), the acidity of ? -hydrogen. Aldol condensation, Cannizzaro reaction, Haloform reaction,
chemicalteststodistinguishbetweenaldehydesandketones.
Carboxylic Acids:Acidic strength and factors affecting it.
UNIT 18: ORGANIC COMPOUNDS CONTAINING NITROGEN
General methods of preparation, properties, reactions and uses.
Amines: Nomenclature, classification, structure, basic character and identification of primary, secondary
andtertiaryaminesandtheirbasiccharacter.
Diazonium Salts: Importance in syntheticorganic chemistry.
UNIT 19: BIOMOLECULES
General introduction and importance of biomolecules.
CARBOHYDRATES – Classification, aldoses and ketoses, monosaccharides (glucose and fructose) and
constituentmonosaccharidesofoligosaccharides(sucrose,lactoseandmaltose).
PROTEINS - Elementary idea of ? -amino acids, peptide bond, polypeptides, proteins: primary,
secondary,tertiaryandquaternarystructure(qualitativeideaonly),denaturationofproteins,enzymes.
VITAMINS – Classification and functions.
NUCLEIC ACIDS–ChemicalconstitutionofDNAandRNA,biologicalfunctionsofnucleicacids.
Hormones (General introduction)
UNIT 20: PRINCIPLES RELATED TO PRACTICAL CHEMISTRY
Detection of extra elements (Nitrogen, sulphur, halogens) in organic compounds, detection of the
followingfunctionalgroups,hydroxyl (alcoholic andphenolic),carbonyl (aldehyde andketones)carboxyl
andaminogroupsinorganiccompounds.
 Thechemistryinvolvedinthepreparationofthefollowing:
Inorganiccompounds,Mohr’ssalt,potashalum.
Organic compounds: Acetanilide, p-nitro acetanilide, aniline yellow, iodoform.
 The chemistry involved in the titrimetric exercises – acids, bases and the use of indicators,
oxalic-acidvsKMnO4,Mohr’ssaltvsKMnO4
 Chemicalprinciplesinvolvedinthequalitativesaltanalysis:
Cations–Pb2+,Cu2+,Al3+,Fe3+,Zn2+,Ni2+,Ca2+,Ba2+,Mg2+,NH4+
Anions-CO32−,S2-,SO42−,NO3-,NO2-,Cl-,Br-, I-(Insolublesaltsexcluded).
Chemical principles involved inthe following experiments:
1. EnthalpyofsolutionofCuSO4
2. Enthalpyofneutralizationofstrongacidandstrongbase.
3. Preparationoflyophilicandlyophobicsols.
4. Kineticstudyofthereactionofiodideionswithhydrogenperoxideatroomtemperature.
Syllabus for JEE (Main) Paper 2A (B.Arch.) - Mathematics, Aptitude Test and Drawing Test
Part - I MATHEMATICS
UNIT 1: SETS, RELATIONS AND FUNCTIONS:
Sets and their representation; Union, intersection and complement of sets and their algebraic properties;
Power set; Relations, type of relations, equivalence relations, functions; one-one, into and onto functions,
thecompositionoffunctions.
UNIT 2: COMPLEX NUMBERS AND QUADRATIC EQUATIONS:
Complex numbers as ordered pairs of reals, Representation of complex numbers in the form a + ib and
their representation in a plane, Argand diagram, algebra of complex numbers, modulus and argument (or
amplitude) of a complex number, Quadratic equations in real and complex number systems and their
solutions; Relations between roots and coefficients, nature of roots, the formation of quadratic equations
withgivenroots.
UNIT3: MATRICES AND DETERMINANTS:
Matrices, algebra of matrices, type of matrices, determinants and matrices of order two and three,
evaluation of determinants, area of triangles using determinants; Adjoint and inverse of a square matrix;
Testofconsistencyandsolutionofsimultaneouslinearequationsintwoorthreevariablesusingmatrices.
UNIT 4: PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS:
The fundamental principle of counting, permutations and combinations; Meaning of P(n, r) and C(n, r).
Simpleapplications.
UNIT 5: BINOMIAL THEOREM AND ITS SIMPLE APPLICATIONS:
Binomialtheoremforapositiveintegralindex,generaltermandmiddletermandsimpleapplications.
UNIT 6: SEQUENCE AND SERIES:
Arithmetic and Geometric progressions, insertion of arithmetic, geometric means between two given
numbers,RelationbetweenA.MandG.M.
UNIT 7: LIMIT, CONTINUITY AND DIFFERENTIABILITY:
Real–valued functions, algebra of functions; polynomial, rational, trigonometric, logarithmic and
exponential functions; inverse functions. Graphs of simple functions. Limits, continuity and
differentiability. Differentiation of the sum, difference, product and quotient of two functions.
Differentiation of trigonometric, inverse trigonometric, logarithmic, exponential, composite and implicit
functions; derivatives of order upto two, Applications of derivatives: Rate of change of quantities,
monotonic-Increasinganddecreasingfunctions,Maximaandminimaoffunctionsofonevariable.
UNIT 8: INTEGRAL CALCULAS:
Integral as an anti-derivative, Fundamental integrals involving algebraic, trigonometric, exponential and
logarithmic functions. Integration by substitution, by parts and by partial fractions. Integration using
trigonometricidentities.
Evaluationofsimpleintegralsofthetype
The fundamental theorem of calculus, properties of definite integrals. Evaluation of definite integrals,
determiningareasoftheregionsboundedbysimplecurvesinstandardforms.
UNIT 9: DIFFRENTIAL EQUATIONS :
Ordinarydifferentialequations,theirorder anddegree,thesolutionofdifferentialequationby the method
ofseparationofvariables,solutionofahomogeneousandlineardifferentialequationofthetype
??
?? + ? ? ? = ?(?).
UNIT 10: CO-ORDINATE GEOMETRY :
Cartesian system of rectangular coordinates in a plane, distance formula, sections formula, locus and its
equation,theslopeofaline,parallelandperpendicularlines,interceptsofalineontheco-ordinateaxis.
Straight line: Various forms of equations of a line, intersection of lines, angles between two lines,
conditions for concurrence of three lines, the distance of a point form a line, co-ordinate of the centroid,
orthocentreandcircumcentreofatriangle.
Circle, conic sections:Astandardformofequationsofacircle,thegeneralformoftheequationofacircle,
itsradiusandcentre,equationofacirclewhentheendpointsofadiameteraregiven,pointsofintersection
of a line and a circle with the centre at the origin and sections of conics, equations of conic sections
(parabola,ellipseandhyperbola)instandardforms.
UNIT 11: THREE DIMENSIONAL GEOMETRY :
Coordinates of a point in space, the distance between two points, section formula, direction ratios and
directioncosinesandtheanglebetweentwointersectinglines.Equationof aline;Skewlines,theshortest
distancebetweenthemanditsequation.
UNIT 12: VECTOR ALGEBRA :
Vectors and scalars, the addition of vectors, components of a vector in two dimensions and three-
dimensionalspaces,scalarandvectorproducts.
UNIT 13: STATISTICS AND PROBABILITY :
Measuresofdispersion;calculationofmean,median,modeofgroupedandungroupeddata,calculationof
standard deviation, variance and mean deviation for grouped and ungrouped data. Probability: Probability
ofanevent,additionandmultiplicationtheoremsofprobability,Baye'stheorem,probabilitydistributionofa
randomvariable.
UNIT 14: TRIGONOMETRY :
Trigonometrical identities and trigonometrical functions, inverse trigonometrical functions and their
properties.
Part –II APTITUDE TEST
UNIT - 1 Awarenessof persons: Buildings, Materials.
Objects, Texture related to Architecture and Build-environment, Visualizing three- dimensional objects
from two-dimensional drawings. Visualizing. Different sides of three- dimensional objects. Analytical
ReasoningMentalAbility(Visual,NumericalandVerbal)
UNIT – 2 Three dimensional- perception: Understanding and appreciation of scale and proportions of
objects, building forms and elements, colour texture harmony and contrast Design and drawing of
geometrical or abstract shapes and patterns in pencil. Transformation of forms both 2D and 3D union,
subtraction rotation, development of surfaces and volumes, Generation of plans, elevations and 3D views
ofobjects,creatingtwo-dimensionalandthree-dimensionalcompositionsusinggivenshapesandforms.
Part – III DRAWING TEST
Sketching of scenes and activities from memory of urbanscape (public space, market, festivals, street
scenes, monuments, recreational spaces, etc.). landscape (riverfronts. Jungle. Gardens, trees. Plants, etc.)
andrurallife.
To be conductedina Drawing sheet.
Note: Candidates are advised to bring pencils, own geometry box set, crasets and colour pencils and
crayonsfortheDrawingTest.
Syllabus for JEE (Main) Paper 2B (B.Planning) - Mathematics, Aptitude Test and Planning
Part - I MATHEMATICS
UNIT 1: SETS, RELATIONS AND FUNCTIONS:
Sets and their representation; Union, intersection and complement of sets and their algebraic properties;
Power set; Relations, type of relations, equivalence relations, functions; one-one, into and onto functions,
thecompositionoffunctions.
UNIT 2: COMPLEX NUMBERS AND QUADRATIC EQUATIONS:
Complex numbers as ordered pairs of reals, Representation of complex numbers in the form a + ib and
their representation in a plane, Argand diagram, algebra of complex numbers, modulus and argument (or
amplitude) of a complex number, Quadratic equations in real and complex number systems and their
solutions; Relations between roots and coefficients, nature of roots, the formation of quadratic equations
withgivenroots.
UNIT3: MATRICES AND DETERMINANTS:
Matrices, algebra of matrices, type of matrices, determinants and matrices of order two and three,
evaluation of determinants, area of triangles using determinants; Adjoint and inverse of a square matrix;
Testofconsistencyandsolutionofsimultaneouslinearequationsintwoorthreevariablesusingmatrices.
UNIT 4: PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS:
The fundamental principle of counting, permutations and combinations; Meaning of P(n, r) and C(n, r),
Simpleapplications.
UNIT 5: BINOMIAL THEOREM AND ITS SIMPLE APPLICATIONS:
Binomialtheoremforapositiveintegralindex,generaltermandmiddletermandsimpleapplications.
UNIT 6: SEQUENCE AND SERIES:
Arithmetic and Geometric progressions, insertion of arithmetic, geometric means between two given
numbers,RelationbetweenA.MandG.M.
UNIT 7: LIMIT, CONTINUITY AND DIFFERENTIABILITY:
Real–valued functions, algebra of functions; polynomial, rational, trigonometric, logarithmic and
exponential functions; inverse functions. Graphs of simple functions. Limits, continuity and
differentiability. Differentiation of the sum, difference, product and quotient of two functions.
Differentiation of trigonometric, inverse trigonometric, logarithmic, exponential, composite and implicit
functions; derivatives of order upto two, Applications of derivatives: Rate of change of quantities,
monotonic-Increasinganddecreasingfunctions,Maximaandminimaoffunctionsofonevariable.
UNIT 8: INTEGRAL CALCULAS:
Integral as an anti-derivative, Fundamental integrals involving algebraic, trigonometric, exponential and
logarithmic functions. Integration by substitution, by parts and by partial fractions. Integration using
trigonometricidentities.
Evaluationofsimpleintegralsofthetype
The fundamental theorem of calculus, properties of definite integrals. Evaluation of definite integrals,
determiningareasoftheregionsboundedbysimplecurves.
UNIT 9: DIFFRENTIAL EQUATIONS :
Ordinary differential equations, their order and degree, the solution of differential equation by the method of
separationofvariables,solutionofahomogeneousandlineardifferentialequationofthetype
??
?? + ? ? ? = ?(?).
UNIT 10: CO-ORDINATE GEOMETRY :
Cartesian system of rectangular coordinates in a plane, distance formula, sections formula, locus and its
equation,theslopeofaline,parallelandperpendicularlines,interceptsofalineontheco-ordinateaxis.
Straight line:Variousformsofequationsofaline,intersectionoflines,anglesbetweentwolines,conditionsfor
concurrence of three lines, the distance of a point form a line, co-ordinate of the centroid, orthocentre and
circumcentreofatriangle.
Circle, conic sections:Astandardformofequationsofacircle,thegeneralformoftheequationofacircle,its
radius and centre, equation of a circle when the endpoints of a diameter are given, points of intersection of a
line and a circle with the centre at the origin and sections of conics, equations of conic sections (parabola,
ellipseandhyperbola)instandardforms.
UNIT 11: THREE DIMENSIONAL GEOMETRY :
Coordinates of a point in space, the distance between two points, section formula, direction ratios and
direction cosines and the angle between two intersecting lines. Equation of a line; Skew lines, the shortest
distancebetweenthemanditsequation.
UNIT 12: VECTOR ALGEBRA :
Vectors and scalars, the addition of vectors, components of a vector in two dimensions and three-dimensional
spaces,scalarandvectorproducts.
UNIT 13: STATISTICS AND PROBABILITY :
Measures of dispersion; calculation of mean, median, mode of grouped and ungrouped data, calculation of
standard deviation, variance and mean deviation for grouped and ungrouped data.Probability:Probabilityofan
event, addition and multiplicationtheorems of probability, Baye's theorem, probability distribution of a random
variable.
UNIT 14: TRIGONOMETRY :
Trigonometricalidentitiesandtrigonometricalfunctions,inversetrigonometricalfunctionsandtheirproperties.
Part –II APTITUDE TEST
UNIT - 1 Awarenessofpersons,Buildings,Materials,ObjectsandTexturesrelatedtoArchitectureandBuild-
environment,Visualizingthree-dimensional objectsfromtwo-dimensionaldrawings.Visualizingdifferentsides
ofthree-dimensionalobjects,AnalyticalReasoningMentalAbility(Visual,NumericalandVerbal)
UNIT – 2Threedimensional-perception:Understandingandappreciationofscaleand proportions ofobjects,
building forms and elements, colour texture harmony and contrast Design and drawing of geometrical or
abstract shapes and patterns in pencil. Transformation of forms both 2D and 3D union, subtraction rotation,
development of surfaces and volumes, Generation of plans, elevations and 3D views of objects, creating two-
dimensionalandthree-dimensionalcompositionsusinggivenshapesandforms.
Part – III PLANNING
UNIT-1 GENERAL AWARENESS.
General knowledge questions and knowledge about prominent cities, development issues, government
programsetc.
UNIT-2 SOCIAL SCIENCES
Theideaofnationalism,nationalisminIndia,pre-modernworld,19th-centuryglobaleconomy,colonialismand
colonial cities, industrialization, resources and development, types of resources, agriculture, water, mineral
resources,industries,nationaleconomy;Human Settlements.
Power-sharing, federalism, political parties, democracy, the constitutionof India.
Economic development- economic sectors, globalization, the concept of development, poverty; Population
structure,socialexclusionandinequality,urbanization,ruraldevelopment,colonialcities.
UNIT-3 THINKING SKILLS
Comprehension (unseen passage); mapreadingskills, scale, distance, direction, area etc.;criticalreasoning;
understandingofcharts,graphsandtables;basicconceptsofstatisticsandquantitativereasoning.